Eck 3.4.0 release (#5838)
elastic/docs-content: deploy-manage/deploy/cloud-on-k8s/advanced-elasticsearch-node-scheduling.md

> ## Topology spread constraints and availability zone awareness [k8s-availability-zone-awareness]

Reviewer: this page is getting very long. how would you feel about splitting this off into its own page? doesn't have to be now

Author: sure it can be a follow-up 🙂

> Distributing {{es}} nodes and shard replicas across failure domains (typically cloud availability zones) is a fundamental requirement for production clusters. ECK provides built-in zone awareness support and also allows manual configuration for advanced use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Production clusters should distribute {{es}} nodes and shard replicas across failure domains, typically cloud availability zones. ECK provides built-in zone awareness and also supports manual configuration for advanced use cases.
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

### Zone awareness using the `zoneAwareness` field [k8s-zone-awareness]

> {applies_to}`eck: ga 3.4`

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```{applies_to}
eck: ga 3.4
```
````

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

> The `zoneAwareness` field on NodeSets is the recommended way to set up availability zone awareness. Instead of manually configuring topology spread constraints, downward node labels, environment variables, and {{es}} allocation awareness settings yourself, you add a single `zoneAwareness` field and ECK handles the rest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `zoneAwareness` field on NodeSets is the recommended way to set up availability zone awareness. Instead of manually configuring topology spread constraints, downward node labels, environment variables, and {{es}} allocation awareness settings, you add a single `zoneAwareness` field and ECK handles the rest.
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

> When `zoneAwareness` is set on a NodeSet, the operator automatically:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When `zoneAwareness` is set on a NodeSet, the operator automatically does the following:
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

* Sets `node.attr.zone` and `cluster.routing.allocation.awareness.attributes: k8s_node_name,zone` in the {{es}} configuration.
* Injects a required node affinity rule ensuring that the topology key label exists on the node, so pods are only placed on nodes that carry the label.
* When `zones` are specified, additionally restricts pod placement to those specific zones.

#### Minimal zone awareness

To spread pods across all available zones using defaults:

```yaml subs=true
apiVersion: elasticsearch.k8s.elastic.co/v1
kind: Elasticsearch
metadata:
  name: quickstart
spec:
  version: {{version.stack}}
  nodeSets:
  - name: default
    count: 6
    zoneAwareness: {}
```

#### Zone awareness with explicit zones

To restrict pods to specific availability zones:

```yaml subs=true
apiVersion: elasticsearch.k8s.elastic.co/v1
kind: Elasticsearch
metadata:
  name: quickstart
spec:
  version: {{version.stack}}
  nodeSets:
  - name: hot
    count: 6
    config:
      node.roles: ["data_hot"]
    zoneAwareness:
      zones:
        - us-east1-a
        - us-east1-b
        - us-east1-c
```

> #### Zone awareness with custom topology key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Zone awareness with a custom topology key
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

By default, `zoneAwareness` uses the `topology.kubernetes.io/zone` node label. To use a different label:

```yaml subs=true
apiVersion: elasticsearch.k8s.elastic.co/v1
kind: Elasticsearch
metadata:
  name: quickstart
spec:
  version: {{version.stack}}
  nodeSets:
  - name: default
    count: 6
    zoneAwareness:
      topologyKey: my.custom/zone-label
```

#### Customizing spread behavior

To customize `maxSkew`, `whenUnsatisfiable`, or other topology spread constraint fields, provide a `topologySpreadConstraint` for the same `topologyKey` in the `podTemplate`. The operator preserves user-provided constraints and does not inject its own default for that key:

```yaml subs=true
apiVersion: elasticsearch.k8s.elastic.co/v1
kind: Elasticsearch
metadata:
  name: quickstart
spec:
  version: {{version.stack}}
  nodeSets:
  - name: default
    count: 6
    zoneAwareness:
      topologyKey: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
    podTemplate:
      spec:
        topologySpreadConstraints:
        - topologyKey: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
          maxSkew: 3
          whenUnsatisfiable: ScheduleAnyway
```

#### Mixed NodeSets with and without zone awareness

> Enable `zoneAwareness` on **all** NodeSets in a cluster for the best results. If some NodeSets are accidentally left without `zoneAwareness`, the operator applies safeguards to keep the cluster consistent:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable `zoneAwareness` on all NodeSets in a cluster for the best results. If some NodeSets don't have `zoneAwareness` enabled, the operator applies safeguards to keep the cluster consistent:
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

* All NodeSets in the cluster still receive the `ZONE` environment variable and {{es}} zone configuration (`node.attr.zone`, `cluster.routing.allocation.awareness.attributes`) so that shard allocation awareness works cluster-wide.

> * Non-zoneAware NodeSets receive a required node affinity ensuring that the topology key exists for nodes that carry the topology label, but they do not receive topology spread constraints and might not be evenly distributed across zones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* NodeSets without `zoneAwareness` receive a required node affinity ensuring that the topology key exists for nodes that carry the topology label, but they do not receive topology spread constraints and might not be evenly distributed across zones.
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

::::{important}

> Adding `zoneAwareness` to any NodeSet triggers a one-time rolling restart of **all** NodeSets in the cluster, because zone-related {{es}} configuration and environment variables are applied cluster-wide. To avoid unnecessary restarts, enable `zoneAwareness` on every NodeSet at the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding `zoneAwareness` to any NodeSet triggers a one-time rolling restart of all NodeSets in the cluster, because zone-related {{es}} configuration and environment variables are applied cluster-wide. To avoid unnecessary restarts, enable `zoneAwareness` on every NodeSet at the same time.
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

::::

#### Validation rules

* All zone-aware NodeSets in a cluster must use the same `topologyKey`.
* When using the default topology key (`topology.kubernetes.io/zone`), the operator allows it automatically if the `--exposed-node-labels` flag is unset or empty. If `--exposed-node-labels` is explicitly set to a non-empty value, the default topology key must also be included in the allowed list. Custom topology keys must always be allowed by the operator’s `--exposed-node-labels` configuration.
* The `zones` list, when specified, must contain at least one entry and no duplicates.

### Manual zone awareness configuration [k8s-zone-awareness-manual]

> For ECK versions before 3.4.0, or for advanced use cases not covered by the `zoneAwareness` field, you can manually configure availability zone awareness. The following section describes how to manually configure availability zone awareness.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For ECK versions before 3.4.0, or for advanced use cases not covered by the `zoneAwareness` field, you can manually configure availability zone awareness.
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

Refer to the next section or to the [{{es}} sample resource in the ECK source repository](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/tree/{{version.eck | M.M}}/config/samples/elasticsearch/elasticsearch.yaml) for a complete example.

#### Using node topology labels, Kubernetes topology spread constraints, and {{es}} shard allocation awareness [k8s-availability-zone-awareness-example]

The following example demonstrates how to use the `topology.kubernetes.io/zone` node labels to spread a NodeSet across the availability zones of a Kubernetes cluster.

> By default ECK creates a `k8s_node_name` attribute with the name of the Kubernetes node running the Pod, and configures {{es}} to use this attribute. This ensures that {{es}} allocates primary and replica shards to Pods running on different Kubernetes nodes and never to Pods that are scheduled onto the same Kubernetes node. To preserve this behavior while making {{es}} aware of the availability zone, include the `k8s_node_name` attribute in the comma-separated `cluster.routing.allocation.awareness.attributes` list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, ECK creates a `k8s_node_name` attribute with the name of the Kubernetes node running the Pod, and configures {{es}} to use this attribute. This ensures that {{es}} allocates primary and replica shards to Pods running on different Kubernetes nodes and never to Pods that are scheduled onto the same Kubernetes node. To preserve this behavior while making {{es}} aware of the availability zone, include the `k8s_node_name` attribute in the comma-separated `cluster.routing.allocation.awareness.attributes` list.
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8
